# YouMe Transformer Firmware

## Credits

The YouMe Transformer hardware was designed by Colin Clark Colin Clark of [Lichen Community Systems Worker Cooperative Canada](https://lichen.coop). The firmware was developed by [Tony Atkins](https://github.com/duhrer).

## License

This repository is released under the BSD-3 license.


## Compiling the YouMe Transformer Firmware

### Prerequisites

1. Git
2. CMake
3. Docker and/or the Pi Pico SDK toolchain

### Install OpenOCD, Picotool, and the Compiler Toolchain

TODO: Add instructions.

### Update Submodules

Init and recursively update all submodules:
```git submodule update --init --recursive```

### Set Environment Variables

The following environment variables need to be set:

1. ```PICO_OPENOCD_PATH``` should point to a directory containing an RP2350-compatible version of OpenOCD (which should contain both the openocd binary and its scripts directory).
2. ```PICO_TOOLCHAIN_PATH``` should point to a directory containing the arm-eabi-none GCC cross-compiler.

#### Example Environment Variables

```sh
PICO_TOOLS_PATH=~/.pico-sdk
export PICO_TOOLCHAIN_PATH=$PICO_TOOLS_PATH/toolchain/13_3_Rel1
export PICO_OPENOCD_PATH=$PICO_TOOLS_PATH/openocd/0.12.0+dev
```

### Configuring the Build

#### Release and Debug Builds

The CMake build is set up to build optimized Debug versions by default. To build an unoptimized debug build, include ```-DPICO_DEOPTIMIZED_DEBUG=1``` when you invoke the compile script (or CMake directly). A Release build can be generated by specifying ```-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release```.

### Compilation

The firmware can be compiled either in a Docker container or using a locally-installed version of the Pi Pico development toolchain. Flashing the firmware is be done locally using the Pico fork of OpenOCD.

Support for building and remote debugging the firmware in VS Code is also included.

#### Compile Locally in the Shell

Assuming the necessary toolchain is installed, a couple of scripts are provided for compiling locally:

##### Compile the Firmware

```sh
./compile.sh
```

##### Manually install the Firmware

1. Ensure power to the board is disconnected
2. Hold down the SW1 button on the board
3. Connect power
4. A volume named RP2350 should be mounted on your file system
5. Copy ```build/youme-transformer.uf2``` to the RP2350 volume

##### Flash the Firmware using a Pico Debugger

```sh
./flash-firmware.sh build/youme-transformer.elf
```

##### Clean Up the Build Artifacts

```sh
./clean.sh
```

#### Building and Debugging with VS Code

You'll need a Pi Pico Probe connected to your computer, and your Pico board should also be connected via USB. The project is set up with OpenOCD acting as a debug server for arm-eabi-none-gdb running on your computer.

Build tasks have been defined for building unoptimized Debug builds and Release builds.

The CMake extension for VS Code has been set up as well, and can be used to invoke a build from the Command Palette by first choosing "CMake: Configure" and then "CMake: Build". See ```.vscode/settings.json``` for the CMake extension's settings.

#### Compile with Docker

The Docker image contains the Pi Pico cross-compilation toolchain pre-installed, so you don't need to have it installed locally (unless you want use a debugger). It assumes you will bind mount the project directory as a volume in the Docker container.

##### Build the Docker Image

```sh
docker build . -t youme-transformer
```

##### Compile the Firwmware

```sh
docker run -v `pwd`:/project --rm youme-transformer ./docker-compile.sh
```

##### Run an interactive shell in the container

```sh
docker run -v `pwd`:/project -it --rm youme-transformer
```

#### Caveats

The Docker and local builds share the same CMake build directory, but aren't compatible. Make sure to clean before switching between them.
